Abstract - Handwriting is one of the mode available for communication. In today’s world every domain like medical, business etc (for example-in storing the data) seems to be digitizing. But for currently available handwritten text document to be digitalized, usage of manual labour for this process will be quite expensive and tedious as well. To solve the above problem, pattern recognition applications can be helpful. In the available handwritten text document, both digits and alphabets will be present. From which we propose to solve the problem of digit recognition (0-9).The goal is to implement a pattern classification method to recognize the handwritten digits provided in the MNIST
dataset containing images of handwritten digits based on the K Nearest Neighbors machine learning algorithm. It has it’s applications in numeric entries in the forms filled up by hand (for example-tax forms, application forms), online handwriting on computer tablets, processing bank cheques and so on.
Today, handwriting recognition systems are used in many areas. For example, there is a need for handwriting recognition systems for reading and archiving old documents, bank checks and letters. The main difficulty of handwritten numerals recognition is that the manually written digits are not of a similar size, stroke thickness, position and orientation. For this problem we will use the MNIST dataset consist of offline handwritten digits ranging from 0-9. Each digit is a gray-level fixed-size image with a size of 28 x 28 (or 784 pixels) Every line of this database file depicts an image, i.e. 785 numbers between 0 and 255.
The first number of each line is the label, i.e. the digit which is depicted in the image. The rest of the numbers depict the intensities of the pixels of an image corresponding the number in the label. MNIST Dataset - MNIST dataset from Kaggle website contains 42,000 training images and 28,000 testing images. The dataset consist of images labeled grayscale images of size 28 x 28 pixels. In grayscale images, each pixel is a shade of gray and can have a value between 0 and 255 where 0 is black and 255 is white. The datasets are imported using pandas library. It can be imported with the following commands
import pandas as pd
variable = pd.read_csv(filename)
Training-
To train the model, K Nearest Neighbors algorithm is used. It works on the basic principle that similar objects are closer to each other. The new data point will be assigned a value based on how closely it matches the points in the training set. The working can be explained from the following steps –
Step 1 : For implementing any algorithm, we need datasets. So as explained above, we must load both the training and testing datasets.
Step 2 : The datasets are now split to form a validation set which is used to validate our model performance during training.
Step 3 : Next, we need to choose the value of k i.e, the nearest data points.
Step 4 : Now each new test input point,
Calculate the Euclidean distance between the test data and each row of training data by giving the distance metric. Now, based on the distance value, they are sorted in ascending order. From the sorted array, it chooses the top K rows. Now, it will assign a class to the test point based on the labels of the most frequent class of the selected rows.
Step 5 : End

From the steps followed above, a point from the test set will be predicted a value based on the trained model. Scikit-learn (Sklearn) is the most useful and robust library for machine learning in Python. It provides a selection of efficient tools for machine learning and statistical modeling including classification, regression, clustering and
dimensionality reduction via a consistence interface in Python. We make use of the functions in this library to train the model. Functions like train_test_split is used to split the dataset to form the validation set. To get the classifier implementing the k-nearest neighbors, KNeighborsClassifier function is used.
For the specified parameter values, GridSearchCV function is used. This method performs exhaustive search over specified parameter values for an estimator. The images present in the test dataset can be visualized using the matplot library. Instead of using the pre-existing database, a database can be prepared from the handwritten digits by us and the given digit can be predicted using the following steps –
Step 1 : The image of the handwritten digit can be opened and read using the Python Imaging Library. Python Imaging Library is a free and open-source additional library for
the Python programming language that adds support for opening, manipulating, and saving many different image file formats. The command used for this is
PIL.Image.open(fp, mode=’r’)
Also, to convert the given image to gray scale, convert function from PIL is used.
Step 2 : The given image needs to be resized to a required size. The existing size of the image can be found using the image.shape command. Using the OpenCV, image is resized using the resize function.
Step 3 : Normalization is a data preparation technique of transforming the columns in a dataset to the same scale is referred to as normalization. Every dataset does not need to be normalized for machine learning. So, its optional. After this is done, we obtain the intensities of the pixels of an image. Later by converting this obtained form to a dataframe, then flattening, squeezing and reshaping it results in the form that we require. The resultant will now be in the format of the vector and used to store in
the database for further training process.
Step 4 : To prepare the model, sklearn library is used. Functions like train_test_split and KNeighborsClassifier functions are used. These functions take the prepared dataset as input and using those samples, the model is trained.
Step 5 : GridSearchCV and fit functions are used to fit the model. Finally, the model will be ready for evaluation.
Step 6 : Any external input can be given to the above prepared model to predict. Following the first three steps we obtain the format that is ready for predicting the outputs.
References-
L. Deng, “The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for machine learning research,”IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29, pp. 141-142
U Ravi Babu, Aneel Kumar and Dr Venkateswarlu, “Handwritten Digit Recognition Using Structural, Statistical Features and K-nearest Neighbor Classifier.”
A. Mishra and D. Singh, “A. Mishra and D. Singh, ”Handwritten digit recognition using combined feature extraction technique and neural network.”
M. B. Abdulrazzaq and J. N. Saeed, “A Comparison of Three Classification Algorithms for Handwritten Digit Recognition, ”International Conference on Advanced Science and Engineering
